README.md, before:

# Bazzite Plus

This is my custom spin of Bazzite adding a bunch of packages I use regularly

## Switch to this Image

From your bootc system, run the following command substituting in your Github username and image name where noted.
```bash
sudo bootc switch ghcr.io/saltscratch/bazzite-plus
```
This should queue your image for the next reboot, which you can do immediately after the command finishes. You have officially set up your custom image! See the following section for an explanation of the important parts of the template for customization.

# Repository Contents

## Containerfile

The [Containerfile](./Containerfile) defines the operations used to customize the selected image.This file is the entrypoint for your image build, and works exactly like a regular podman Containerfile. For reference, please see the [Podman Documentation](https://docs.podman.io/en/latest/Introduction.html).

## build.sh

The [build.sh](./build_files/build.sh) file is called from your Containerfile. It is the best place to install new packages or make any other customization to your system. There are customization examples contained within it for your perusal.

## build.yml

The [build.yml](./.github/workflows/build.yml) Github Actions workflow creates your custom OCI image and publishes it to the Github Container Registry (GHCR). By default, the image name will match the Github repository name. There are several environment variables at the start of the workflow which may be of interest to change.

# Building Disk Images

This template provides an out of the box workflow for creating disk images (ISO, qcow, raw) for your custom OCI image which can be used to directly install onto your machines.

This template provides a way to upload the disk images that is generated from the workflow to a S3 bucket. The disk images will also be available as an artifact from the job, if you wish to use an alternate provider. To upload to S3 we use [rclone](https://rclone.org/) which is able to use [many S3 providers](https://rclone.org/s3/).

## Setting Up ISO Builds

The [build-disk.yml](./.github/workflows/build-disk.yml) Github Actions workflow creates a disk image from your OCI image by utilizing the [bootc-image-builder](https://osbuild.org/docs/bootc/). In order to use this workflow you must complete the following steps:

1. Modify `disk_config/iso.toml` to point to your custom container image before generating an ISO image.
2. If you changed your image name from the default in `build.yml` then in the `build-disk.yml` file edit the `IMAGE_REGISTRY`, `IMAGE_NAME` and `DEFAULT_TAG` environment variables with the correct values. If you did not make changes, skip this step.
3. Finally, if you want to upload your disk images to S3 then you will need to add your S3 configuration to the repository's Action secrets. This can be found by going to your repository settings, under `Secrets and Variables` -> `Actions`. You will need to add the following
  - `S3_PROVIDER` - Must match one of the values from the [supported list](https://rclone.org/s3/)
  - `S3_BUCKET_NAME` - Your unique bucket name
  - `S3_ACCESS_KEY_ID` - It is recommended that you make a separate key just for this workflow
  - `S3_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY` - See above.
  - `S3_REGION` - The region your bucket lives in. If you do not know then set this value to `auto`.
  - `S3_ENDPOINT` - This value will be specific to the bucket as well.

Once the workflow is done, you'll find the disk images either in your S3 bucket or as part of the summary under `Artifacts` after the workflow is completed.

# Justfile Documentation

The `Justfile` contains various commands and configurations for building and managing container images and virtual machine images using Podman and other utilities.
To use it, you must have installed [just](https://just.systems/man/en/introduction.html) from your package manager or manually. It is available by default on all Universal Blue images.

## Environment Variables

- `image_name`: The name of the image (default: "image-template").
- `default_tag`: The default tag for the image (default: "latest").
- `bib_image`: The Bootc Image Builder (BIB) image (default: "quay.io/centos-bootc/bootc-image-builder:latest").

## Building The Image

### `just build`

Builds a container image using Podman.

```bash
just build $target_image $tag
```

Arguments:
- `$target_image`: The tag you want to apply to the image (default: `$image_name`).
- `$tag`: The tag for the image (default: `$default_tag`).

## Building and Running Virtual Machines and ISOs

The below commands all build QCOW2 images. To produce or use a different type of image, substitute in the command with that type in the place of `qcow2`. The available types are `qcow2`, `iso`, and `raw`.

### `just build-qcow2`

Builds a QCOW2 virtual machine image.

```bash
just build-qcow2 $target_image $tag
```

### `just rebuild-qcow2`

Rebuilds a QCOW2 virtual machine image.

```bash
just rebuild-vm $target_image $tag
```

### `just run-vm-qcow2`

Runs a virtual machine from a QCOW2 image.

```bash
just run-vm-qcow2 $target_image $tag
```

### `just spawn-vm`

Runs a virtual machine using systemd-vmspawn.

```bash
just spawn-vm rebuild="0" type="qcow2" ram="6G"
```

## File Management

### `just check`

Checks the syntax of all `.just` files and the `Justfile`.

### `just fix`

Fixes the syntax of all `.just` files and the `Justfile`.

### `just clean`

Cleans the repository by removing build artifacts.

### `just lint`

Runs shell check on all Bash scripts.

### `just format`

Runs shfmt on all Bash scripts.

## Additional resources

For additional driver support, ublue maintains a set of scripts and container images available at [ublue-akmod](https://github.com/ublue-os/akmods). These images include the necessary scripts to install multiple kernel drivers within the container (Nvidia, OpenRazer, Framework...). The documentation provides guidance on how to properly integrate these drivers into your container image.

## Community Examples

These are images derived from this template (or similar enough to this template). Reference them when building your image!

- [m2Giles' OS](https://github.com/m2giles/m2os)
- [bOS](https://github.com/bsherman/bos)
- [Homer](https://github.com/bketelsen/homer/)
- [Amy OS](https://github.com/astrovm/amyos)
- [VeneOS](https://github.com/Venefilyn/veneos)

Commit message:

Update README with switch back instructions
Added instructions for switching back to the Bazzite image.

README.md, after:

# Bazzite Plus

This is my custom spin of Bazzite adding a bunch of packages I use regularly

# Switch to this Image

From your bootc system, run the following command substituting in your Github username and image name where noted.
```bash
sudo bootc switch ghcr.io/saltscratch/bazzite-plus
```
This should queue your image for the next reboot, which you can do immediately after the command finishes. You have officially set up your custom image! See the following section for an explanation of the important parts of the template for customization.

# Switching back to Bazzite
```bash
sudo bootc switch ghcr.io/ublue-os/bazzite-gnome
```

# Repository Contents

## Containerfile

The [Containerfile](./Containerfile) defines the operations used to customize the selected image.This file is the entrypoint for your image build, and works exactly like a regular podman Containerfile. For reference, please see the [Podman Documentation](https://docs.podman.io/en/latest/Introduction.html).

## build.sh

The [build.sh](./build_files/build.sh) file is called from your Containerfile. It is the best place to install new packages or make any other customization to your system. There are customization examples contained within it for your perusal.

## build.yml

The [build.yml](./.github/workflows/build.yml) Github Actions workflow creates your custom OCI image and publishes it to the Github Container Registry (GHCR). By default, the image name will match the Github repository name. There are several environment variables at the start of the workflow which may be of interest to change.

# Building Disk Images

This template provides an out of the box workflow for creating disk images (ISO, qcow, raw) for your custom OCI image which can be used to directly install onto your machines.

This template provides a way to upload the disk images that is generated from the workflow to a S3 bucket. The disk images will also be available as an artifact from the job, if you wish to use an alternate provider. To upload to S3 we use [rclone](https://rclone.org/) which is able to use [many S3 providers](https://rclone.org/s3/).

## Setting Up ISO Builds

The [build-disk.yml](./.github/workflows/build-disk.yml) Github Actions workflow creates a disk image from your OCI image by utilizing the [bootc-image-builder](https://osbuild.org/docs/bootc/). In order to use this workflow you must complete the following steps:

1. Modify `disk_config/iso.toml` to point to your custom container image before generating an ISO image.
2. If you changed your image name from the default in `build.yml` then in the `build-disk.yml` file edit the `IMAGE_REGISTRY`, `IMAGE_NAME` and `DEFAULT_TAG` environment variables with the correct values. If you did not make changes, skip this step.
3. Finally, if you want to upload your disk images to S3 then you will need to add your S3 configuration to the repository's Action secrets. This can be found by going to your repository settings, under `Secrets and Variables` -> `Actions`. You will need to add the following
  - `S3_PROVIDER` - Must match one of the values from the [supported list](https://rclone.org/s3/)
  - `S3_BUCKET_NAME` - Your unique bucket name
  - `S3_ACCESS_KEY_ID` - It is recommended that you make a separate key just for this workflow
  - `S3_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY` - See above.
  - `S3_REGION` - The region your bucket lives in. If you do not know then set this value to `auto`.
  - `S3_ENDPOINT` - This value will be specific to the bucket as well.

Once the workflow is done, you'll find the disk images either in your S3 bucket or as part of the summary under `Artifacts` after the workflow is completed.

# Justfile Documentation

The `Justfile` contains various commands and configurations for building and managing container images and virtual machine images using Podman and other utilities.
To use it, you must have installed [just](https://just.systems/man/en/introduction.html) from your package manager or manually. It is available by default on all Universal Blue images.

## Environment Variables

- `image_name`: The name of the image (default: "image-template").
- `default_tag`: The default tag for the image (default: "latest").
- `bib_image`: The Bootc Image Builder (BIB) image (default: "quay.io/centos-bootc/bootc-image-builder:latest").

## Building The Image

### `just build`

Builds a container image using Podman.

```bash
just build $target_image $tag
```

Arguments:
- `$target_image`: The tag you want to apply to the image (default: `$image_name`).
- `$tag`: The tag for the image (default: `$default_tag`).

## Building and Running Virtual Machines and ISOs

The below commands all build QCOW2 images. To produce or use a different type of image, substitute in the command with that type in the place of `qcow2`. The available types are `qcow2`, `iso`, and `raw`.

### `just build-qcow2`

Builds a QCOW2 virtual machine image.

```bash
just build-qcow2 $target_image $tag
```

### `just rebuild-qcow2`

Rebuilds a QCOW2 virtual machine image.

```bash
just rebuild-vm $target_image $tag
```

### `just run-vm-qcow2`

Runs a virtual machine from a QCOW2 image.

```bash
just run-vm-qcow2 $target_image $tag
```

### `just spawn-vm`

Runs a virtual machine using systemd-vmspawn.

```bash
just spawn-vm rebuild="0" type="qcow2" ram="6G"
```

## File Management

### `just check`

Checks the syntax of all `.just` files and the `Justfile`.

### `just fix`

Fixes the syntax of all `.just` files and the `Justfile`.

### `just clean`

Cleans the repository by removing build artifacts.

### `just lint`

Runs shell check on all Bash scripts.

### `just format`

Runs shfmt on all Bash scripts.

## Additional resources

For additional driver support, ublue maintains a set of scripts and container images available at [ublue-akmod](https://github.com/ublue-os/akmods). These images include the necessary scripts to install multiple kernel drivers within the container (Nvidia, OpenRazer, Framework...). The documentation provides guidance on how to properly integrate these drivers into your container image.

## Community Examples

These are images derived from this template (or similar enough to this template). Reference them when building your image!

- [m2Giles' OS](https://github.com/m2giles/m2os)
- [bOS](https://github.com/bsherman/bos)
- [Homer](https://github.com/bketelsen/homer/)
- [Amy OS](https://github.com/astrovm/amyos)
- [VeneOS](https://github.com/Venefilyn/veneos)
